Solar Panels In The UK Surpass Coal-Powered Electricity Nov 16, 2016 1 0 
According to research from Carbon Brief , electricity coming from solar panels in the UK surpassed the amount that came from coal-power. The solar panels across the UK generated about 7,000 gigawatt hours of electricity between April and September, while coal produced about 6,300 gigawatt hours. Solar power continues to trend positively. 
According to James Court, who is the head of the Renewable Energy Association , this is an incredible accomplishment: 
“Solar overtaking coal this summer would have been largely unthinkable five years ago.” 
However, now that winter is approaching, coal will take over again in production as there is a greater need for more heating and lighting through the cold months. 
Juliet Davenport, who is the CEO of Good Energy , recently said : 
“When I started my company 15 years ago, you could fit the whole UK renewable energy industry into a small room, and now nearly 25% of the UK’s power comes from renewables. As clean technology advances, Britain is bidding fair-well to coal. The transition to a 100% renewable future is within Britain’s grasp.” 
This is a great step forward and another sign of the times we are living in. It is becoming cheaper to use solar every year that passes. In fact, according to the Renewable Energy Institute , the cost of solar energy will be cheaper than fossil fuel energy by 2025, with it decreasing every year until that point. “The answer rises every morning.” 
In another sign of the continuing trend towards clean and renewable energy, it has been reported by the U.S. Energy Information Administration that U.S. oil companies last year lost $67 billion, at a time when oil prices took a major dive. On the opposite end of that spectrum, Elon Musk’s Tesla company made $22 million in the first quarter of this year . Again, we see the trend moving towards clean energy. 
Throughout the eastern hemisphere of the world, there is another large sign that renewable energy is here to stay and is advancing quickly. 
In September of this year, leaders from China, Russia, Japan and South Korea met to sign an agreement to begin building what is known as the Asian Super-Grid . The grid is set to become the world’s largest collaboration of sustainable, renewable and clean energy, which will provide energy to the four countries involved, as well as throughout Southern Africa, Europe and Southeast Asia. 
How soon do you think the world will be running off of entirely renewable energy? What will be the obstacles? What are the current obstacles? What other renewables exist outside of solar, wind, wave and geothermal that excite you? What other stories are out there that are yet more proof that the world is moving in a positive direction with it’s energy usage? 
Lance Schuttler graduated from the University of Iowa with a degree in Health Science and does health coaching through his website Orgonlight Health . You can follow the Orgonlight Health facebook page or visit the website for more information and other inspiring articles.